Finchy's Advanced Guide to Scientific Primitive Material Operations

This is an in depth explanation of Tinker's Construct (or TCon) tools and effective utilization of them.

Chapter 0: Words and Vocabulary --some of these won't make sense before you've read the rest

	Blocks and Stations
Part Builder: Block used to make parts out of materials
Stencil Table: Block used to make patterns for the Part Builder	
Tool Station: Block used to make tools out of parts, as well as add modifiers and replace parts
Pattern Chest: A block that stores patterns and casts for convenience.

	Tools and Tool Stats
Tool: Item that breaks blocks or hurts enemies
Modifier: Some effect that the tool has
Material: The thing that a tool part is made of
Material Modifier: A modifier that comes with the material
Attack Damage: The damage that a tool deals, or a part provides innately
Mining Speed: The speed with which a tool breaks blocks
Mining Level: Determines what a pickaxe or shovel can mine
Durability: How long a tool can be used before breaking, and needing to be repaired
Effective Durability: How long a tool can be used, taking into account the chance for durability to not be consumed
Modifier Slots: The capacity for a tool to accept modifiers
Mining XP: The capacity for a tool to increase its mining level

	Smelting and Heavy Smithing
Smeltery: Large structure that processes molten metals
Pattern: Used to craft a pattern for use in a Part Builder
Cast: Used to cast tool parts in a Smeltery
Extruder: Electric machine that can produce tool parts oof advanced materials
Fluid solidifer: Electric machine that can produce crossbow bolt casts of advanced materials
	
Chapter 1: Tools, and making them.

	1.1: Why use TCon?
	A TCon tool is a big undertaking relative to simply making an iron pickaxe, but with a little bit of care and attention, can be much more powerful. The tools are generally stronger, faster, and will never break permanently. They can be modified and improved without ever having to craft a new one, allowing your tools to be permanent over the course of an entire game. They're also much cheaper, both in the amount of materials used to affect the world, and in the cost to actually make and improve them.
	
	1.2: Crafting tools out of basic materials.
	The first step to making a tool is learning what parts it's made of. A pickaxe, for example, is made of a tool rod, a part binding, and a pickaxe head. To make these parts, you need a pattern that corresponds to it. In a stencil table, you can turn a blank pattern into the pattern you'd like by selecting the corresponding part icon on the sides of the GUI. This pattern will allow you to craft parts with it infinitely.
	Holding shift while hovering over a pattern allows you to see what it can be used to make in a part builder. In GT:NH, stone parts are used only for crafting, and can't be used to make parts. Flint and bone are both readily available and make strong tools in the early game. When you have the parts, you can then move them into a tool station. By clicking one of the tools on the left in the tool station, you can see the locations where you have to place the parts. By putting the parts where the silloughette goes, you can craft a Tinker's Construct tool.
	
	1.3: Tool and using them.
	A tool is a general word for 1 of 5 general kinds of thing that you can make in a Tool Station. A tool can be, broadly: A simple tool, that only breaks one block at a time; A heavy tool, that breaks either a 3x3 or a 3x3x3 of blocks at a time; A melee weapon, that hits enemies and does a bunch of damage; A ranged weapon, that hits enemies from far away and does a bunch of damage; Finally, ammunition, which is generally consumed by a ranged weapon. These are the main things you want to use from TCon, so they're what this guide is going to focus on. Of note, is that only some of the tools are available to craft in a tool station.
	Using a tool causes it to lose durability. When a tools durability hits 0, the tool is broken, and needs to be repaired. There is no cost for repairing a tool other than the material used to do so. Ammunition has durability in the form of ammo count, and is replenished in the same way as a tools durability. It's impossible to lose a tool by using it. In the event that your tool is broken, you can repair it by using whatever material the head is made of. It's important when making expensive tools that you have the ability to repair it in some way.
	
	1.4: Modifiers
	As you use your new tool, you'll see a message in chat every once in a while that your tool has leveled up. Every few level ups, your tool will gain a new modifier slot, which can be used to improve it. Modifiers of interest include Lapis, which gives it Fortune and Looting; Redstone, which gives it efficiency and improves the draw speed of bows; and Quartz, which improves the damage of your tool. There will be a list of modifiers later.
	
	1.5: Upgrading a tool.
	Modifiers are one way to upgrade a tool, but there is another. When a tool is at max durability, you can place it in a tool station with a different tool part corresponding to one of the parts used to make it. When you do this, you'll get the option to replace the part on the tool with the part you've added, by simply pulling it out of the output. This will destroy the part that was previously on the tool, but other than that, comes with no extra cost. This allows you to upgrade the mining speed, mining level, durability, drawspeed, damage output, etc. of your tool. Note once again that replacing the head of a tool will also change what you repair the tool with.
	
	2.1: The smeltery
	The smeltery is a multiblock (meaning, structure that takes up more than one block of space) that allows you to melt down metals and cast them into tool parts, which can be used as normal. Crafting the smeltery is up to you. In order to cast a tool part, you first need to melt some copper and some zinc, at a 3:1 ratio. Place a part (usually stone or netherrack) in a casting table, and pour the brass over it. This will form a part cast, and you can then pour metals over that cast to make parts out of metal. Just like with patterns, you can hold shift and hover over the cast to see what can be made in it. Usually this will be different items from the pattern, but some of them can be made in either. Note that bolts (for use in the crossbow) can only be made using a smeltery.
	
	2.2: The tool forge.
	The tool forge is an upgrade to the tool station. It features an extra slot for adding lots of a modifier material, but also allows for the construction of every kind of tool in the game. This includes special tools, that mine lots of blocks at once, as well as some special weapons that do lots of damage. It's locked behind the smeltery.
	
	2.3: Electric smithing
	When you get to MV, you get access to the MV extruder. Among many other things you can do with it, you can also extrude metals through TCon casts without having to use the smeltery. This allows you to make parts easier, but also opens up many new materials for use, including very advanced ones. Some materials take higher voltages to produce, and others are available at MV but require ridiculous amounts of time without overclocking.
	The fluid solidifer is used in a similar way for making crossbow bolts out of advanced materials.
	
	This concludes the very basics to making tools in Tinker's Construct. Everything after this is more encyclopedic in nature.
	
	3.1: List of parts
	Handle: part that determines the durability of a tool, and adds a modifier
	Extra: part that only adds a modifier
	Head: part that adds a modifier, and determines all stats of the tool. Some tools have multiple tool heads.
	List of handles: Tool Rod, Tough Tool Rod.
	List of extras: Tool Binding, Tough Tool Binding, Crossbar, Hand Guard, Wide Guard
	Everything else is a tool head, or is used to make a ranged weapon. All ranged parts are unique.
	Of note is that Large Plates generally act as tool heads, providing stats, but they don't influence what you can repair the tool with. In the case a tool has multiple tool heads, it takes the average of most stats.
	
	3.2 List of tools:
	Pickaxe: Used to mine stones and hard objects.
	Shovel: Used to mine dirt and soft objects.
	Hatchet: Used to mine wood.
	Mattock: Combination shovel and hatchet. Can also be used to hoe dirt. Slightly slower than a shovel or hatchet.
	Broadsword: Classic vanilla sword. Can block with right click.
	Longsword: Higher damage sword. Can lunge with right click, at the cost of hunger.
	Rapier: Lower damage sword. Capable of armor penetration, and can backstep with right click.
	Dagger: Lower damage sword. Can be thrown with right click.
	Frying Pan: Lower damage sword. Can stun enemies, can block with right click, and can be placed with shift-right click to cook foods.
	Battlesign: Lower damage sword that can reduce damage taken. Can be written to like a sign.
	Chisel: Crafting tool.
	Shortbow: Quickdrawing ranged weapon that fires arrows.
	Arrow: Medium ammo-count ranged ammunition that is fired by bows.
	Throwing Knife: Very high capacity, low damage thrown tool. Does low damage when used melee.
	Javelin: High damage, low capacity thrown tool. Does medium damage when used melee.
	Round Shield: Tool used to block damage during combat.
	Hammer: 3x3 Pickaxe. Hold shift to mine one block at a time.
	Lumberaxe: 3x3x3 Axe. Mines whole trees in one block. Hold shift to mine one block at a time.
	Excavator: 3x3 Shovel. Hold shift to mine one block at a time.
	Scythe: 3x3x3 plant breaking implement. Does low damage to enemies in an AOE. Works on leaves, grass, flowers, and other miscellaneous plantlife. Can collect a 3x3 of crops with right click.
	Cleaver: High damage, slow use-time sword. Can block with right click. Gives mining fatigue III when holding.
	Battleaxe: Medium damage axe with natural knockback. Breaks up to 8 logs above the block mined at once.
	Longbow: Slower draw with higher range than a shortbow. Does better with heavy arrows. Fires arrows.
	Crossbow: Bow that is loaded before firing. Fires bolts instead of arrows. Automatically reloads after firing.
	Bolt: Ammo fired by crossbows. Same capacity as arrows. Made differently.
	Shuriken: Thrown weapon that is thrown instantly. Accurate, with a high ammo capacity.
	Heater Shield: Essentially just a better round shield.
	
	3.3: Materials to look for.
	Stone Age: Flint and bone are your best bet. A thaumium binding or wide guard can give an extra modifier slot. When you get access to Iron, switch to it.
	Steam Age: Bronze, then Steel, then Alumite are all the best materials up to that point. 
	Note that you get a free Ball of Moss when you get access to the Nether in the Steam age, which can be used on a tool to make it constantly repair itself. As well, killing a King Slime on a slime island allows you to reward a free Cobalt tool head, which can be melted down and used to make Cobalt tools early. I would recommend you use this to make a Pickaxe.
	LV: There are few upgrades here, but a Magnalium/Ardite/Carbon crossbow is really strong. Perditio Crystals have a very high mining speed, but very poor durability. Magnalium is also good for the tool rod of a crossbow bolt.
	MV: An MV extruder will allow you to make some of the best material tools in the game. Vanadiumsteel and Damascus Steel are both very good for tool heads and handles respectively.
	Magic Break: These are mostly untiered, so I'll throw them in here. Void Metal and Terrasteel are both incredible materials for tools, as they have good durability and mining speed. Void Metal in particular is quite cheap, so worth using.
	HV: When you get to the moon, Meteoric Steel becomes available, which has very high damage on most weapons. Energetic Alloy is also good for crossbow bolts.
	EV: Tungstensteel is slightly better than Meteoric Steel for weapons.
	IV: Elven Elementium makes better tool rods than Damascus Steel does. Palladium is also higher damage than Tungstensteel. If you refuse to do magic, Oriharukon is on tier with Terrasteel and Void Metal.
	LUV: Adamantium Alloy is a strong general purpose material. Adamantium makes for higher damage than Palladium.
	ZPM: Infinity makes good extras and handles, as it is unbreakable. It's also the best material for weapons in the game.
	Past this point, there really isn't any reason to upgrade your Tinker's Tools. You'll be glad you did up to this point, though!